## Summary  
In *Africans in Colonial Louisiana*, Dr. Gwendolyn Midlo Hall argues this document offers the first Gulf Coast reference to gumbo (“un Gombeau”) in the archive.[^i] This is the testimony of Mama “Julie” Comba,[^ii] a fifty year old négresse, an African woman of the Mandinga Nation who lived in the Hospital for the Poor (L'Hôpital des Pauvres) and was enslaved to the Capuchin priests. Mama Comba appears before the French Superior Council in this, her second interrogation, as a result of the arrest of two runaways, the nègre Cézar, and the nègre Louis, called Foy (dit Foÿ). The runaways were caught and accused of murder, but ultimately charged with public drunkenness, theft and firing weapons into the air (no one was killed), and with being fugitives. Mama Comba was interrogated because she hosted a feast that Cézar and Louis were guests at, bringing with them a pig that Louis allegedly stole and that the guests all took part in cooking and eating. The document below is drawn from part of Mama Comba's testimony.  

## Transcription (French, diplomatic)  
\[feuille 1 recto\] \[digital 3\]  
\
\[Marginalia:\] pre paye  
\[Rubrica, Foucault\]  
4 Septembre 1764  
Interrogatoire  
de la négresse  
Comba  
\
\[Corps:\] 
\
N.^o 1835 Du 4. 7.^bre 1764  
Interrogatoire fait par nous Conseiller Commissaire  
En Cette partie a La Requette du procureur General  
Du Roy et En Vertu de L'ordonnance de Monsieur  
Dabbadie, a La Negresse nommée Comba Contre  
Le Negre nommé Louis accusé et tenu a prison  
de Cette Ville ainsi qu'il ensuit  
\
A Eté Emmené de prison La Negresse nommée  
Comba demeurant a L'hopital des pauvres,  
Laquelle après serment par elle fait de Dire  
Verité fus laquelle seroit par nous interrogée  
L'a été ainsi qu'il ensuit  

## Translation (English, modern)  
\[page # 1\] \[digital 3\]
\
\[Marginal note:\]  Pre-paid  
\[Rubric, Foucault\]  
September 4, 1764  
Interrogation  
of the négresse  
Comba  
\
\[Body:\] 
\
No. 1835 of September 4, 1764  
Interrogation made for the Advisor  
Commissioner  
in the petition of request by the Advisor  
General  
of the King and in virtue of the order of Mr.  
D'Abbadie, of the négresse named Comba against  
the *nègre* named Louis, detained in prison  
in this city as follows:  
\
Taken from the prison, the *négresse*, named  
Comba, stays at *l'Hôpital des Pauvres* \[Charity Hospital\].  
After taking her oath, she says she will speak  
truth when questioned by us, as follows:  

## Notes  
\
*Please note that what appear to be typos (missing spaces, abbreviations, misspellings, strikeouts, superscript) appear in the original manuscript, but are corrected in the more modernized translation. For more on our editorial practices see our page on [Editorial Practices](insert xxx link here).*  
\
[^i]: Gwendolyn Midlo Hall, *Africans in Colonial Louisiana: The Development of Afro-Creole Culture in the Eighteenth Century* (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1992).See also, Dominique Rogers, *Voix d'esclaves: Antilles, Guyane et Louisiane Françaises, XVIIIE-XIXE siécles* (Paris: Éditions Karthala, 2015).  
[^ii]: Mama Comba's name evokes the Senegambian goddess who emerged during the slave trade,  *Mame Coumba Bang, or Maam Kumba Castel*, and rules the waters of Saint-Louis and Gorée, respectively. She and other Vodun deities are retained in the pantheon of Louisiana Voodoo. For more on West African religion and culture in Louisiana, see Hall, *Africans in Colonial Louisiana; Ibrahima Seck, Bouki Fait Gombo: A History of the Slave Community of Habitation Haydel (Whitney Plantation) Louisiana, 1750-1860* (New Orleans: University of New Orleans Press, 2014); Jessica Marie Johnson, *Wicked Flesh: Black Women, Intimacy, and Freedom in the Atlantic World* (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2022).
