# Summary
In March of 1740, an enslaved woman named Bradiguene traveled to the office of the Intendant in New Orleans. There, she faced a crowd of enslavers who gathered to bid for her purchase. As property of the King, Bradiguene likely lived on the King’s plantation, located on the present-day West Bank of New Orleans in Algiers and Gretna and home to a large community of enslaved people.[^i] During the height of the slave trade to French-controlled Louisiana, enslaved people originating from Senegambia, the Bight of Benin, and the Congo regions who disembarked in Louisiana traveled first to the King’s plantation before enslavers gathered to purchase them. On this day, Bradiguene crossed the Mississippi River to the *Vieux Carré* where Nicolas Henry, the Clerk of the Superior Council, purchased her and inscribed this sale permanently into the archive.  

## Notes 

[^i]: After the retrocession of Louisiana by the Company of the Indies back to France in 1731, the plantation of the Company of the Indies became the King’s Plantation. Located on today’s West Bank of New Orleans, the plantation spanned across the neighborhood of Algiers and part of the city of Gretna. According to the census taken in 1731, nine years prior to the sale of Bradiguene, two hundred and thirty enslaved Africans or people of African descent lived on that land. This included twenty-nine children. See Charles R. Maduell, Jr., *The Census Tables for the French Colony of Louisiana from 1699 through 1732* (Baltimore: Genealogical Publishing Co., Inc., 1972), 121. To learn more about the management of the plantation including the design of the cabins for the enslaved community, see Shannon Lee Dawdy, “Proper Caresses and Prudent Distance: A How-To Manual from Colonial Louisiana,” in Ann Laura Stoler, ed., *Haunted by Empire: Geographies of Intimacy in North American History* (Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press, 2006), 140-162. For more on the West Bank, see Richard Campanella, *The West Bank of Greater New Orleans: a Historical Geography* (Baton Rouge, Louisiana: Louisiana State University Press, 2020).  
