# Summary
Jean Baptiste Marly negotiates a contract for his wife Venus’s freedom. He agrees to serve her enslaver Jean Joseph Delfaut de Pontalba, an infantry officer and the commander at Pointe Coupée, as cook for three years. During that time, Pontalba will remain responsible for Venus’s care, providing necessities like food and medicine. After Marly’s three years of service, Venus will be free.  

[Transcription](#transcription-(French,-diplomatic))  
[Translation](#translation-(English,-modern))  
[Notes](#notes) 

## Transcription (French, diplomatic)

[feuille 1 recto] [digital 2] 

[Marginalia:] 
1745 
9 9<sup>bre</sup> 
marly negre 
Engagement 
avec pontalba 

Command<sup>[an]t</sup> 

f,sup.o,</sup>. 29 
(4096__.) 

[Corps:] 
(26917.) 

fut present En sa personne Jean Baptiste Marly 
*negre* Libre Lequel sera volontairement Et sans 
Contrainte Engagé Envers le Sieur Jean Joseph 
Delfau 
de Pontalba officier d’Infanterie + [Command<sup>[an]t</sup>][^i] 
a la pointe 
Coupé[e] pour le servir En qualité de Cuisinier 
Pendant LEspace de trois annees Consecutives 
devolües et acomplies Lesquelles Commenceront 
a Courir au premier de decembre prochain et 
finiront 
a pareil jour p<sup>er</sup> [premier] decembre X <sup>sept C</sup>
[dix-sept-cent] quarante huit 
pendant Lequel tem[p]s il sera tenu de Le servir 
En Lad[ite] qualité soit icy a la N<sup>[ouve]lle</sup> orleans 
au<sup>d[it]</sup> 
Poste de la pointe Coupé[e] ou ailleur si Le 
Service 
du Roy le demande et ce sans aucune interruption 
de la part du<sup>d[it]</sup> Marly, sobligeant monsr. sieur 
[monsieur] 
J[ean Joseph] de Pontalba de le Nourrir et 
Medicamenter 
pendant Lesd[ites] trois années aubout duquel 
tem[p]s 
Monsr. Sr. [monsieur] de Pontalba promet Et 
s[‘]oblige  
de donner La Liberté a Venus *Negresse* son 
Esclave Laquelle est femme dud[it] Marly Mariés 
Ensemble En face d’ [de l’] Eglise [;] que sil 
arrivoit  
que monsr. Sr de Pontalba Vint a mourir pendant  
l’Intervalle desd[its] trois années Il asseure par 
Ces 
presentes La Liberte a Lad[ite] venus ladite 
*negresse* 
Laquelle se pourra servir des presentes pour  
En Requerir La Confirmation par Mess<sup>[ieu]rs</sup> Les 
Gouverneur Et ordonnateur delad[ite] province 


[feuille 1 verso] [digital 3] 
(26918.) 


et Ce pour presenter a toutes Creances Et 
heritages si existe En Consideration des bons 
services que Luy a Rendu lad[ite] venus 
Et quelle pensserait Luy Rendre dans lavenir [;] 
Le mary et La femme, Lors estant Libre  
depart Et dautre aubout desd[ites] trois années 
de se Retirer ou bon Leur Semblera sinon  
Q[ui]ls nayment s’arranger pour servir  
Ensuite monsr. [monsieur] de pontalba suivant 
Les Conventions quils pourront faire 
Ensemble [;] Comme aussy a Eté Convenu   
entre Les parties que si led[it] marly venoit  
amourir pendant Lesd[ites] trois annees 
il Consent permettre La Liberté 
de Lad[ite] Esclave ++ [bien Entendu 
que Lad[ite] Esclave servira Les trois années  
monsr. Sr. De pontalba] ainsy quil a ete  
Convenu Comme aussy que si pendant 
Led[it] tem[p]s Led[it] Marly venoit a se  
deranger de son devoir par sa faute Monsr. 
[monsieur] de Pontalba Le Renverrait de Chez 
Luy sans quil puisse Rien pretendre  
Non plus que sa femme [;] Car ainsy 
promet oblige et Chacun 
En droit luy Renonce [;] fait Et 
Passé a la n<sup>[ouve]lle</sup> orleans En [l’]Etude 
Lan Mil Sept Cent quarante 


[feuille 2 recto] [digital 4] 
(26919.) 


Cinq Le Neuf Novembre [en] presence  
de Sieur Augustin Chantalou et 
Marin Le Normant temoins y 
demeurant Et ont signé ++ [bien Entendu 
ue Lad[ite] Esclave servira Les trois années  
monsr. Sr. De pontalba] 

[Signé:] Chantalou 
[Signé:] pontalba 
[Signé:] jean baptiste Marly 
[Signé:] normand 
[Signé:] henry [Rubrica] N[otaire] 

## Translation (English, modern)

[page #1] [digital 2] 

[Marginal note:] 
1745 
November 9 
Marly, *nègre*, 
Engagement 
with Pontalba 


fo. 29 
(4096__.) 

[Body:] 
(26917.) 


[Before the Council] Jean Baptiste Marly himself, 
free *nègre*, voluntarily and without 
constraint, will serve *Sieur* Jean Joseph Delfau 
de Pontalba, infantry officer commanding at Point  
Coupée, as a cook 
for a period of three consecutive years, 
allotted and completed, which will begin 
on the first [day] of next December and will finish 
on the same day, December first, seventeen 
hundred forty eight; 
during which time he will be obliged to serve him 
in this occupation either here in New Orleans,
at the said post of Pointe Coupée, or elsewhere if 
the 
king’s service requires it, and without any 
interruption  
on the part of the aforesaid Marly, Monsieur  
Jean Joseph Delfau de Pontalba will be obligated 
to feed and medicate him 
during the said three years, at the end of which 
time  
Monsieur de Pontalba promises and obligates 
himself to give freedom to his *négresse esclave* 
Venus, who is the wife of the said Marly, married 
to each other before the church[^ii]; [and] if Monsieur 
de Pontalba were to die during the course of the 
said three years, he guarantees through those 
present freedom to the said Venus, *négresse*,  
who may use those present [the witnesses] to 
request confirmation from the Governor and  
*Ordonnateur* of the said province 


[p. # 2] [dig. 3] 
(26918.) 


and this [document] to be presented to all claims 
and 
inheritances should [they] exist, in consideration 
of the good 
services that the said Venus rendered to him 
and that she will render him in the future; 
the husband and the wife, then each of them being 
free, at the end of the said three years,  
to withdraw wherever it seems good to them 
unless 
they want to arrange to serve 
*monsieur* de Pontalba thereafter, according to 
the conventions that they might make 
together; as it also has been agreed 
between the parties that if the said Marly came 
to die during the said three years, 
he consents to grant the freedom 
of the said slave ++ [it being understood that the 
said slave will serve *Monsieur* Pontalba the three 
years] as well as it has also been  
agreed that if during 
the said time the said Marly came to  
neglect his duty through his fault *Monsieur* 
Pontalba would dismiss him from his home, 
without him or his wife being able to claim 
anything; thus [he] 
promises, obliges, and each 
person waives their right; made and  
passed at the notary’s office in New Orleans, 
the year one thousand seven hundred and forty- 


[p. # 2] [dig. 4] 
(26919.) 


five, the ninth November, in the presence 
of *Sieur* Augustin Chantalou and 
Marin Le Normant, witnesses  
residing there, and have signed  
++ [it being understood that the said slave will 
serve *Monsieur* Pontalba the three years] 

[Signed:] [Augustin] Chantalou 
[Signed:] [Jean Joseph Delfaut] Pontalba 
[Signed:] Jean Baptiste Marly[^iii] 
[Signed:] [Marin Le] Normant 
[Signed:] [Nicolas] Henry [Rubric], Notary

## Notes

[^i]: After drafting this initial record, notary Nicolas Henry added to two separate places in the document. These additions are represented by the symbols “+” and “++” used in the transcription. To aid readers, we have included the additive text in brackets where the symbols surface.  

[^ii]: The Code Noir mandated certain regulations regarding the marriages between enslaved people, such as baptism as a requirement for marriage and the approval of enslavers prior to marrying. For more on this history, see “En Face D’Eglise”: Legally Sanctioned Marriages” in Sophie White, *Voices of the Enslaved: Love, Labor, and Longing in French Louisiana* (Williamsburg, VA: Omohundro Institute of Early American History & Culture, 2021), 192-196.  

[^iii]: Jean Baptiste Marly signed his name on this document and on several other documents from French colonial Louisiana. Whereas many Africans and people of African descent “left their mark” on records by drawing the cross, Jean Baptiste Marly’s signature hints at both his potential literacy and his elevated status within New Orleans. A pillar in the community, Jean Baptiste Marly served as godfather for several enslaved children baptized during the 1730s and 1740s. For example, on June 7, 1733 Jean Baptiste Marly attended the baptism of Marie, a thirteen day old baby that Jean Baptiste Le Moyne de Bienville claimed as his property, to serve as her godfather. See the Archives of the Archdiocese of New Orleans, St. Louis Cathedral Baptisms, 1731-1733, 06/07/1733. For a brief analysis of Jean Baptiste Marly’s socialization with white people living in New Orleans, see Cecile Vidal, *Caribbean New Orleans: Empire, Race, and the Making of a Slave Society* (Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press, 2019), 168-169. 