# Summary
In October of 1735, sisters Marie Charlotte and Louise gained their freedom from their enslaver Charles St. Pierre de St. Julien. Identified as the daughters of *negresse* Calaix *dit* Gaigné, their mother remained enslaved to St. Pierre de St. Julien. Almost a year later, in September 1736, St. Pierre de St. Julien died.<sup>i</sup> The Attorney for Vacant Estates, Raymond Amyault D’Ausseville, claimed that St. Pierre de St. Julien owed money to the Company of the Indies. On the second page of this record, D’Ausseville voided the manumission of Marie Charlotte, forcing her back into slavery to pay the debt of her former enslaver. Over the next ten years, Marie Charlotte waged a legal battle to secure her manumission and the wages she lost while enslaved.<sup>ii</sup>

[Transcription](#transcription-(French,-diplomatic))
[Translation](#translation-(English,-modern)) 
[Notes](#notes) 

## Transcription (French, diplomatic)  

  [feuille 1 recto] [digital 2]

(23589.)

Je soussigné s<sup>t</sup>. Pierre de 
s<sup>t</sup>
Jullien Reconnoit avoir
ce jourdhuy donné pleine et entiere Liberté a marie
charlotte et Loüise negrites filles de Calaix
d<sup>[i]t[e]</sup> Gaigne<sup>iii</sup>
ma negresse tant pour les bons et agreables 
services
que nous Rendus lesd[its] enfan[t]s que pour 
autres
Raisons particullieres de Conscience et Consent
que lesd[its]
Charlotte et Louise jouissent des a present des 
mesmes
privileges que peuvent avoir toutes personnes
Libres bien entendu quils observeront Le Respect
quils doivent toujours avoir pour les Blancs
et pour mieux assurer Lesd[its] Libertés desd[its]
enfants
Joblige et hypoteque tous mes autres biens
meubles
et Immeubles presents et advenir sans excepter
aucuns de mes autres Esclaves tant pour
ceque Je puis devoir a la Compagnie des Indes
qu’a d’autres particulliers voulant et Entendant
que personne ne puisse a lavenir Leur disputer
Leur Liberté ny rien Leur demander p[our] [tear in
page] quelle
Raison que ce puisse estre, Commaussy
quils puissent sestablir ou bon leur semblera
des quils seront en age de former un 
Etablissement

[f. 1 verso] [dig. 3]

(23590.)

Le present Consentement fait double en presence
des temoins soussigné a la Nouvelle orleans
Ce neufiesme octobre Mil sept cent trente 
Cinq [Signé:] charle De S<sup>t</sup>
 pierre chevalier 
   De S<sup>t</sup> julien
[Signé:] henry temoin [Signé:] aufrere temoin


Liberté non Valide 
donnée par feu M<sup>r</sup>. de
S<sup>t</sup>. Juillien a Marie
[page déchiré] mulatresse a
cause que le dit S<sup>r</sup>. de 
S<sup>t</sup>. Jullien devois trois
fois plus q<sup>l</sup> n’avoit
de bien, et que cette
Liberté a ete donnée 
Sans le Consentement 
de Mess<sup>rs</sup>. les Gouverneur 
et intendant

## Translation (English, modern)

[page #1] [digital 2]

(23589.)

I, the undersigned St. Pierre, c[alled] St. Julien, recognize having 
granted today whole and entire Liberty to Marie 
Charlotte and Louise *Negrites*, daughters of Calaix c[alled] Gaigne,
my *negresse*, as much [in return] for the good and agreeable services 
that the aforesaid children rendered us as for particular reasons of conscience and consent, that the aforesaid 
Charlotte and Louise enjoy from the present time [forward] the same 
privileges that all free people may have, 
provided that they will observe the respect 
that they must always have for white people 
and in order to better assure the said liberties of the said children, 
I oblige and mortgage all my other goods, moveable 
and immoveable, present and future without excepting 
any of my other *esclaves*, both for
that which I may owe to the Company of the Indies
and to other individuals, wanting and intending 
that no one may in the future dispute
their freedom nor ask anything of them for any
reason whatsoever, as well as
that they may establish themselves wherever they see fit
when they are old enough to form an establishment 

[p. #2] [dig. 3]

(23590.)

The present consent made double in the presence
of the undersigned witnesses, at New Orleans, 
this ninth of October, one thousand seven hundred and thirty five.
[Signed:] Charle[s] de St. Pierre Knight/*Chevalier* of St. Julien
[Signed:] [Nicolas] Henry, witness 
[Signed:] [Antoine] Aufrere, witness

Freedom not valid,
given by the late *Mr*. de
St. Julien to Marie
[page torn] *mulatresse*
because the aforementioned *Sr*. de
St. Julien owed three
times more than he had
in property, and that this
freedom was granted
without the consent 
of *Messieurs* the Governor
and the Intendant.
