## Transcription (French, diplomatic)
[feuille 1 recto] [digital 2]

[Marginalia:]

Inventore cotte 284 [Signé:] fleuriau 

[Corps:]

je reconnois avoir vendu et livre au S<sup>r</sup>
Dupard un negre piece d’inde nommé amadit
poular de nation<sup>i</sup>, ~~lorsque~~ estant sur mon depart
pour les illinois<sup>ii</sup>, ledit negre estant hor detat
de pouvoir faire,<sup>iii</sup> le voyage ayant plusieurs 
incommodités, a l’. n<sup>[ouv]elle</sup> orleans ce 10<sup>e</sup> aout 1736    

[Signé:] Baldit<sup>iv</sup> (6556.)

[feuille 1 verso] [digital 3]
jay cedé Le Naigre de nommé cy de lautre part sans aucun prejudise

## Translation (English, modern)

[page # 1] [digital 2]

[Marginal note:]

Inventory side 284 [Signed:] [François] Fleuriau 

[Body:]

I acknowledge having sold and delivered to the Sir
Dupard a *negre, piece d’inde*, named Amadit,
of the *Poular nation*<sup>i</sup>, while on
my way to the Illinois<sup>ii</sup>; the aforementioned *nègre* being
no longer fit for the trip, having several
physical limitations. At New Orleans August 10, 1736.

[Signed:] Baldit<sup>iv</sup> (6556.)

[p. # 2] [dig. 3]
I ceded the *naigre* named here on the other side [of this document], without any prejudice. 



*Please note that what appear to be typos (missing spaces, abbreviations, misspellings, strikeouts, superscript) appear in the original manuscript, but are corrected in the more modernized translation. For more on our editorial practices see (https://docs.k4bl.org/bestpractices).*

i. The majority of slave voyages from Africa to Louisiana during French control originated in Senegambia. French officials and enslavers recorded various African ethnicities in their documents that they attributed to people originating from Senegambia. These include Pulaar, Bambara, Wolof, Mandinka, and more. Amadit likely spoke the Pulaar language, and thus joined the community that Pulaar speakers refer to today as *Haalpulaar’en*.
ii. By the eighteenth century, several Native polities in the Illinois River Valley formed the Illinois Confederacy, including most prominently the Cahokia, Kaskaskia, Peoria, Michigamea and Tamaroa nations. The French used the phrase “Le pays des Illinois,” or the Illinois country, t<sup>i</sup>o describe the geographic region where Illinois, Kaskaskia, Cahokia, Peoria, Tamaroa, and other Algonquin people lived during the eighteenth century centered near today’s Saint Louis, Missouri. At Cahokia, one of the most powerful Mississippian polities connected a society of forty thousand people at its height. Elizabeth Ellis, *The Great Power of Small Nations: Indigenous Diplomacy in the Gulf South* (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2023), 172-178. In the Illinois country, the French established missions and trading activity, especially in fur, with their Native allies. French census takers recorded 334 people living in the Illinois country in 1726, over eighty of whom were African. By 1752, census takers recorded the population of the Illinois country to be 1,360 people, at least four hundred and forty-five of whom were enslaved Africans. See Sophite White, *Voices of the Enslaved: Love, Labor, and Longing in French Louisiana* (Williamsburg, VA. and Chapel Hill: Omohundro Institute of Early American History and Culture and the University of North Carolina Press, 2019), 106-112. 
iii. We understand this comma to be placed in error by the writer. 
iv. Jean Thierry Baldit journeyed to Louisiana in 1720 to work as a surgeon for the LeBlanc concession. In Louisiana, his name became Theodore Baldic, or Baldit. See RSCL 1751/04/10/01 (https://lacolonialdocs.org/document/8346). Five months after Baldit sold Amadit, Baldit died on January 20, 1737. Those enslaved to him were sold at public auction. For the inventory taken of Baldit’s estate including the names and families of Africans and people of African descent enslaved to him, see RSCL 1737/01/24/01 (https://www.lacolonialdocs.org/document/2860) and a certified copy of the inventory in RSCL 1737/02/19/01 (https://www.lacolonialdocs.org/document/2918). Less than a month after Baldic’s death, the Attorney for Vacant Estates in the colony contested the sale of Amadit arguing that Baldic had not gained approval from the Company first. Dupard returned Amadit to the crown, returning Dupard’s five hundred livres in payment. See RSCL 1737/02/11/01 (https://www.lacolonialdocs.org/document/2905). 
