# Summary
Enslaver Bonnaud reports to the Registry of the Superior Council that a man he enslaved named Crusquet died from poisoning. Bonnaud accused Petit, another man he enslaved, of poisoning Crusquet and asks the Superior Council to prosecute Petit.  

[Transcription](#transcription-(French,-diplomatic))  
[Translation](#translation-(English,-modern))  
[Notes](#notes) 

## Transcription (French, diplomatic)

[feuille 1 recto] [digital 2] 
Bonnaud Declare que la Nuit du 19 Du Courant, Il 
mourut 
Un de ses *Negres* Nommé Crusquet a son
habitation[;] de quoy 
ayant eté adverty Il sy transporta avec le S<sup>r</sup>. 
Mirandé Chirurgien  
quy fit L[']ouverture du Corps dud.[it] *Negre* et 
trouva plusieurs Marques 
quy luy firent Connoitre que led.[it] *Negre* avoit 
êté Empoisonné[;][^ii] et 
Comme led.[it] Bonnaud soubçonne [soupçonne] 
Le Nommé petit aussy un de ses  
Negres pour Estre L’auteur de Cet 
Empoisonnem[en]t. suivant la [même] declaration 
~~Meme~~ que Luy en a fait plusieurs fois led<sup>[i]t</sup>. 
Crusquet avant  
Mourir, Il a fait arretter ~~Cejourdhuy~~ et mettre en 
prison led[it]. 
petit pour estre poursuivy Criminellement En 
Justice pour Ce fait 
A la requeste de Monsieur Le procureur general 
du Roy, a la  
N<sup>[ouvel]le</sup>. orleans Ce 21<sup>e</sup>. 8bre. 1729

## Translation (English, modern)

[page # 1] [digital 2] 
Bonnaud declared that on the night of the 19th of 
the current month, one of his *negres* named 
Crusquet died at his 
plantation[^i]; Having been 
alerted of this, he went there with *Sieur* Mirandé, 
surgeon,  
who opened the body of the aforesaid *negre* and 
found several signs 
which made it clear to him that the said *negre* had 
been poisoned; and  
as the said Bonnaud suspects the named Petit, also 
one of his *negres*, of being the author of this 
poisoning; according to the very statement made to 
him several times by the aforementioned Crusquet 
before  
dying,  
He had the aforementioned Petit arrested and 
detained[^iii] to be criminally prosecuted before the 
law for this act 
at the request of *Monsieur* the Prosecutor General  
of the king, at 
New Orleans, this October 21, 1729. 

## Notes

[^i]: Roughly three years after Petit’s death, a census taker visited the plantation of Arnaud Bonnaud. At that time in 1732, Bonnaud lived on a plantation just upriver from New Orleans where at least eighteen Africans or people of African descent were enslaved on the land. Charles R. Maduell, *The Census Tables for the French Colony of Louisiana from 1699 through 1732* (Baltimore: Geneaological Publishing Co., 1972), 116.  

[^ii]: Throughout the Atlantic world, enslaved and free Africans used poison and the threat of it to protect themselves and their kin. Thirty years after Bonnaud accused Petit of using poison to kill Crusquet, enslavers in the French colony of Saint Domingue captured and executed François Makandal, a maroon leader, who they accused of poisoning over six thousand people. Laurent DuBois, *Avengers of the New World: The Story of the Haitian Revolution* (Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University, 2004), 51-59. 

[^iii]: The prison was located next to the church in today’s Jackson Square, at the intersection of today’s Chartres St. and Orleans St. For more on the construction, location, and procedure inside of the prison complex, see especially “‘Said, Without Being Asked’: An Introduction” in Sophie White, *Voices of the Enslaved: Love, Labor, and Longing in French Louisiana* (Williamsburg, VA and Chapel Hill: Omohundro Institute of Early American History and Culture, 2019), 1-26.  