# Summary  
Marion, free *mulatresse*, petitioned the Superior Council to sue the estate of D'Ausseville to recover the wages withheld from her by his illegal actions. Marion reported that before her enslaver died in 1735, he recorded her manumission with the clerk of the Superior Council. Dausseville, as Attorney of Vacant Estates for the Colony, knew this and hid her manumission. Thus Marion was included in the sale of St. Julien's estate under the false pretext that St. Julien owed the Company of the Indies. Using Article 20 of the Code Noir, Marion petitioned Louisiana governor Vaudreuil and *commissaire-ordonnateur* Salmon who granted her her freedom before referring her to the Council to pursue her back wages. When the Attorney General petitioned the governor and *commissaire-ordonnateur* for Marion’s freedom on November 23, 1743, he revealed that St. Pierre de St. Julien was her father. After Marion filed her petition for back wages, the bailiff cited Mr. Aufrere, the proxy of the estate for the heirs of Dausseville, to appear at the next session of the Superior Council. Throughout these records, Marion identifies herself and is identified by others using several names such as Marion, Marie Charlotte, and Marie.   
  
[Transcription](#transcription-(French,-diplomatic))  
[Translation](#translation-(English,-modern))   
[Notes](#notes)  

## Transcription (French, diplomatic)
  
[feuille 1 recto] [digital 2] 
  
A Nosseigneurs du Conseil Superieur  
de la Province de la Louisianne 
   
Supplie humblement marion *mulatresse* Libre  
Disant, que Le feu Sieur S<sup>t</sup>. pierre S<sup>t</sup>. jullien  
son premier maitre, Luy ayant donné sa liberté  
par un Ecrit fait en presence de tesmoins  
Le 9<sup>e</sup> 8<sup>bre</sup> 1735 deceda peu de tem[p]s apres [;]  
on fist Linventaire de ses biens meubles et  
immeubles, de même que de ses papiers et en [le] faisant  
Le feu Sieür amyault Dausseville, Lors procureur  
aux bien vacan[t]s se saisit de ce papier furtivem.<sup>[en]t</sup>  
Sans Le faire Inventorier [;] et voulant avoir Lad.<sup>[i]te</sup> *mulatresse* le cacha et La fist vendre, comme  
Ses autres Effets sous Le faux pretexte que  
Led.<sup>[i]t</sup> S<sup>[ieu]r</sup>. S<sup>t</sup>. Jullien devoit a la Compagnie des  
Indes, plus quil navoit valant [;] il Sen rendit  
adjudicataire pour une Somme de Quinze Cent  
Livres en papier et elle ne dist mot parce qu’on  
Luy faisoit accroire que cetoit pour payer la  
Compagnie, mais Les Comptes du d.<sup>[it]</sup> feu S.<sup>r</sup> S.<sup>t</sup>  
Jullien ayant en fin êté reglés et jugés et Setant  
trouvé de quoy payer Lad.<sup>[i]te</sup> Compagnie, elle  
sest adressée a Monsieur Le Procureur General  
  
   
   
   
   
[f. 1 verso] [dig. 3]   
  
du Roy et Suivant Larticle 20 du Code Noir<sup>i</sup>. 
Luy donna Son memoire pour demander a jouir. 
de La Liberté qui luy êtoit accordée [rayé] [s’] il. 
eut La bonté de S’interresser pour les opprimes [;] et Sur  
Les representations quil fist au Conseil Sa liberté  
Luy fust accordée par Messieurs de Vaudreüil  
et Salmon<sup>ii</sup>, qui Sur Les autres demandes  
La Renvoyerent Se pourvoir au Conseil pour  
Le payement de ses gages ou dedommagement du temps  
quelle a servy led.<sup>[i]t</sup> S.<sup>[ieu]r</sup> Dausseville d’autant plus  
quelle doit rembourser a la Suc.<sup>[cessi]on</sup> une Somme  
de quinze Cent Livres prix de Son achapt  
qui na pas même Sorty de ses mains pour La  
quelle le S<sup>r</sup>. Barbin La poursuit actuellement [;]  
Et Comme il ne Seroit pas juste quil eust eû  
pour rien Le Service dune personne Libre  
quil ne retenoit esclave que par un petit tour  
de Malice Elle vous Supplie quil luy soit  
permis, Nosseigneurs[,] de faire assigner  
au premier Conseil Le S<sup>r</sup>. Aufrere chargé  
de procuration des heritiers et Creanciers du  
feu S. Dausseville pour Se voir Condamner  
a Luy payer une Somme de Vingt Livres  
  
[f. 2 recto] [dig. 4] 
par mois depuis Le jour de La mort  
du S<sup>r</sup>. S<sup>t</sup>. Jullien, jusquau jour de La mort  
du feu S<sup>r</sup>. Dausseville, pour ses gages  
et salaires autant en deduction de la Somme  
de 1500 <sup>tt</sup> [livres] quelle doit rembourser ou telle  
autre somme quil vous plaira d’arbitrer  
pour ses salaires Dommages et interests  
Et fait Justice a La N<sup>ouve</sup>lle. orl.<sup>[ean]s</sup> le 6<sup>e</sup> f.<sup>[evri]er<sup>   
##### 1745.  
##### [Signé:] lenormand
##### La sup.<sup>[pliant]e</sup> 
  
permis dassigner a la  
n<sup>[ouv]elle</sup> orleans ce 6. Fevr[ier]. 1745  
[Signé:] Lenormant  
  
  
Lan Mil Sept Cent quarante Cinq le vingt  
Neufieme de  
Mars, En vertu de L’ord<sup>[onnan]ce</sup> Cy dessus Lacte de  
liberté  
accordée par M<sup>r</sup> de vaudreuil et Salmon du Vingt  
Neuf  
Novembre Mil Sept Cent quarante trois dont  
Copie Est Cy[-]  
Jointe [;] a la Req.<sup>[uê]te</sup> de Marion mulatresse  
dem.<sup>[euran]te</sup> chez led[it] Sr.  
Alexandre hab[itant] vis a vis la N.<sup>[ouve]lle</sup> Orleans  
jay[,] marin  
Le Normand huiss<sup>[i]er</sup> aud<sup>[iencier]</sup> au Conseil  
Sup.<sup>[erieu]r</sup> de Cette prov.[ince]  
dem.<sup>[euran]t</sup> a la N.<sup>[ouve]lle</sup> Orleans ou Est [ai] Ellu  
Domicile soussigné[,]  
signiffié Donné assignation au Sr. aufrere  
procureur des heritiers et Creanciers de la  
suc.<sup>[cessi]on</sup> du feu Sr.  
Amyault dausseville En son D<sup>[omici]le</sup> En Cette   
Ville parlant  
a sa personne  
a Comparoir au premier jour d’aud.<sup>[ien]ce</sup> ord<sup>[inai]re.</sup>   
En lad[ite] Chambre  
du Conseil Superieur pour se voir condamner   
aud[it] Nom a luy  
payer pour six ans neuf mois de Gages la somme  
de six cent soixante six Livres a Raison de  
  
[f. 2 verso] [dig. 5]  
  
Cent Livres par An a quoy Elle se restraint  
avec les Interests du jour de sa demande [;] et de  
quoy  
luy fait scavoir Et luy ay par tant que dessous  
Laisser Copie tant de l[‘]acte de liberte Req.<sup>[uêt]e</sup>  
ord<sup>[onnanc]e</sup>  
que du present dont acte  
   
[Signé:] M. lenormand  
   
[Marginalia:]  
Marin mulatresse  
Contre  
le S[ieu]r aufrere  
  
## Translation (English, modern)  
  
[page #1] [digital 2]  
   
To our lords of the Superior Council  
of the Province of Louisiana  
  
Humbly, begs Marion, free *mulatresse*,  
saying that the late *sieur* St. Pierre St. Julien  
her first master, having granted her freedom  
by a written document made in the presence of witnesses  
on the 9th October 1735, [he] died a short time after[;]  
an inventory was made of his movable [personal] and   
immovable [real] properties, as well as his papers and   
while doing so  
the late *Sieur* Amyault D’Ausseville, then Attorney  
for Vacant Estates, seized this paper  
furtively,  
without taking inventory of it[;] and wanting to keep  
the aforementioned *mulatresse* for himself, hid it [the   
paper] and had her sold along with  
his other effects, under the false pretense that  
the aforementioned *sieur* St. Jullien owed to the   
Company of the Indies more than the value of his   
estate[;] he made himself the  
successful bidder for the sum of fifteen hundred  
*livres* that he paid with a draft, and she said nothing   
because she was told that it was in order to pay the   
Company[;] but the accounts of the said late *sieur* St.  
Jullien having finally been settled and confirmed by the   
judge and having found the means to pay the   
aforementioned Company, she  
addressed *monsieur* the Attorney General  
  
   
[p. #2] [dig. 3]  
  
of the King and following Article 20 of the *Code Noir*  
gave him her statement to ask to enjoy  
the freedom that was granted to her, [crossed out word]   
[if] he would have the kindness to take an interest on  
behalf of the oppressed, and as a result of the case that  
he made in front of the Council, her  
freedom  
was granted to her by *messieurs* Vaudreuil  
and Salmon, who on the other requests  
sent her back to see the Council for  
the payment of her wages or  
compensation for the time  
which she served the said *Sr.* D’Ausseville especially   
because  
she must repay to the estate a Sum  
of fifteen hundred *livres*, the price of her purchase,  
which has not yet left her hands, for  
which the *Sieur* Barbin sues her currently,  
and as it would not be fair that he would have had  
for nothing the service of a free person  
that he only held as a slave by a little trick  
of malice, she begs you that it be permitted to her, our   
lords, to summon   
to the first Council the *sieur* Aufrere, having received    
power of attorney from the heirs and creditors of the late  
*sieur* D’Ausseville to be condemned  
to pay her a sum of twenty *livres*  
   
[p. #3] [dig. 4]  
per month since the day of the death  
of *sieur* St. Jullien, until the day of the death  
of the late *sieur* D’Ausseville, for her wages  
and salaries as much in deduction of the sum  
of 1500 *livres* that she must reimburse or such  
other sum that will please you to arbitrate  
for her wages, damages, and interests,  
and justice will be served [;] in New Orleans on the 6th  
of February 1745.  
[Signed:] Lenormand  
[For] the supplicant  
   
Permission to assign at  
New Orleans this 6th of February 1745  
[Signed:] Lenormant  
   
The year one thousand seven hundred forty five on the  
twenty ninth of  
March, by virtue of the above order, the act of liberty  
granted by *Mr* de Vaudreuil and Salmon on the twenty   
ninth  
November one thousand seven hundred forty three,  
whose copy is here  
attached, to the request of Marion *mulatresse*, housed at   
the residence of the said *sieur*  
Alexandre living opposite New Orleans, I, Marin  
Le Normand, bailiff-usher in the Superior Council of this   
province,  
living in New Orleans where I have jurisdiction,   
undersigned,  
have signified, given summons to *sieur* Aufrere,  
having received power of attorney from the heirs and   
creditors of the  
estate of the late *sieur*  
Amyault d’Ausseville at his residence in this city,   
speaking to him  
in person,  
to appear on the first ordinary day in the said chamber  
of the Council Superior to be condemned in his said   
name to  
pay her for six years nine months of wages the sum  
of six hundred and sixty-six *livres* at the rate of  
  
   
   
   
   
[p.#4] [dig. 5]  
  
one hundred *livres* per year to which she restricts herself,  
with interest beginning from the day of her request, and   
which I make known to him and I hereby leave copy   
below  
of the act of freedom<sup>ii</sup>, the request<sup>iii</sup>, the order<sup>iii</sup>,  
and that of the present document[;] duly noted.  
   
[Signed:] M. Lenormand  
   
[Marginal note:]  
Marion, *mulatresse*,  
against  
*Sieur* Aufrere  
